A couple weeks ago, I did something I haven’t done in over two years. I went on an extended business trip. As I settled in for the six-hour flight to Vancouver, I immediately checked out the movie menu and couldn’t believe my luck: Dune. The allegory about the moral dangers of colonialism is filled with symbolism, action, and plot twists, and it’s set in a mysterious world that grabs hold of you immediately, refusing to let go for a full three hours — in other words, for half the flight.
My entire life, I’ve been a sucker for that kind of story.
When I was little, both my parents worked, and I was raised largely by my grandmother, who lived in the downstairs apartment of our 2-family house. My grandmother, my Baba, was a painter who spent her days in her back bedroom studio, working viscous, multi-colored puddles of acrylic paints into flowers.
Midway through each day, Baba would rinse her hands in turpentine and treat herself to lunch, usually a few slices of bread with butter, a mug of coffee, and a cigarette. Menthols, coffee and turpentine. That was the smell of my childhood.
Before getting back to work, my grandmother would usually follow up lunch with a nap on the couch…at least she would try. Because more often than not, I would crawl onto the sofa next to her, and ask her to tell me a story about Ukraine. But she and I both understood that the story I really wanted to hear was more accurately titled Escape from Ukraine. I wanted to hear about the war. What happened to them, and how they made it to our brick, two family home near Cleveland, Ohio.
Though she never told the story the same way twice, and the details of each chapter changed a bit with every retelling, it always started with a singular theme: Ukraine was beautiful. Whether it was the sun-drenched fields of her childhood home in Kulchytsi, or the narrow streets that led to my grandfather’s family greystone in Lviv, my grandmother could paint Ukraine as vividly with her words as she could illustrate bouquets of poppies with her acrylics.
It’s usually at this point in the story where Baba would reach over, light a cigarette, and take a deep breath.
“…i todi vyjna pryjshla.”
And then the war came. enkhjin
First it was the Russians. Then the Germans. Then the Russians again.
The war always came to my family. Never the other way around.
Of course, for me, that’s when the story got good. It was filled with danger, near misses, and do-or-die decisions. There was the time the Russians were about to take my grandfather away until they realized that he, an engineer, was the only one who knew how to run the local sugar mill. And there was the time when the Germans actually did haul my grandfather away. But my Baba, who had heard that the Germans respected moneyed aristocracy, put on a fur coat, her best hat, and every piece of expensive jewelry she could get her hands on. She then marched straight to the German headquarters, and demanded they release her husband immediately — because she had an important dinner to attend. It worked. There was also the time after the Russians returned, when one of the local communists pulled my grandfather aside at the sugar factory and told him to go home, grab his family, and never come back. And, he emphasized, it had to be that night. My grandfather didn’t need to be told twice.